[Music]
hello everybody
we've got something a bit more topical
today
i'm going to be speaking with dr rima
azar who's associate professor of health
psychology at mount ellison university
co-founder and co-director of navi care
swans navi
and a former holder of a canadian
institute of health research
new investigator salary award in
developmental
psychoneuro immunology she's
co-scientific lead in the three-part
leadership of the new brunswick strategy
for patient-oriented research network
a provincial network including 120
stakeholders under the leadership of two
researchers
two clinicians and two policy makers
she's a former canadian institutes of
health research advisory board member
for the institute of human development
child and youth health at the canadian
institutes of health
research mount ellison university where
dr azar teaches is a canadian
primarily undergraduate liberal arts
university located in sackville
new brunswick it's been ranked the top
undergrad university in canada
21 times in the past 29 years by
mclean's magazine
a record unmatched by any other canadian
university in february of 2021 dr azar
ran into some trouble
at her university because of views she
expressed on her blog while commenting
on
news articles in the media so this is
part of
my ongoing discussions about or
everyone's ongoing discussions about
the state of today's universities thanks
very much for joining me today dr azar
thank you for having me it's
unbelievable that i'm on your show
well it's too bad it has to be under
these circumstances yes indeed
so how long have you been at mount
ellison
uh since 2008 so about 13 years
and what's it been like what department
are you in and what has it been like for
you
psychology and it has been amazing uh
since day one
uh working with my colleagues the
students
my colleagues across the campus the
community
my good relationships with everyone the
administration
the students the union i've never had
any problem
uh at all until sure so you like
mount ellison you like the community
you're happy to be there absolutely
and how what undergraduate courses do
you teach
uh i teach uh courses at all levels so
intro to psychology so first year we
have sections and i teach 206 students
uh health psychology the second year i
teach
a course called perinatal health
psychology third year
and a seminar in my area of
psychoneuroimmunology or advanced health
psychology
and you've enjoyed your teaching as well
as your research oh yes
absolutely and what kind of research do
you do
i do research well my lab is called the
psychobiology of stress and health lab
and my research is i'm interested in
stress in coping
and resilience now currently in relation
to
families of children who have complex
care needs um i work with colleagues at
20 st
john it's
it's just amazing what we can do uh
while being at mount elson university so
working
in the community here working across new
brunswick across canada
etc and where did you do your
undergraduate and graduate work uh
undergraduate at the university of
montreal
um i i did something called sico
education which is
a developmental psychology it's a it's a
more clinically oriented program where
we can practice
i did a master's in it um so i have that
clinical background but i do research
stress research clinical research and i
did my phd in developmental
psychoneuro endocrinology again
university of montreal
i moved to toronto and i did my
postdoctoral fellowship
at the university of toronto university
head network
and yes are you originally from montreal
originally from montreal but originally
originally from beirut lebanon
so i've lived 15 years in montreal i
arrived when i was 17.
yes and i did my seed jet college
that exists in quebec i did a year of
college and the university
so you moved to canada with your parents
or did you come up
yes at first with my parents but then
they moved back
so i chose to stay and i always joke
saying i represent
the azar family in canada it's uh so my
parents are very attached to canada they
are canadians
but they they they live in baywood uh
and i live here uh okay so you
immigrated to canada and you
lived in montreal you went to school in
montreal and then you ended up in
new brunswick and you've been teaching
there you said since 2008 so it's been
years yes so and
what happened you have a blog tell us
about that
yes i'm gonna tell uh the story of how
it happened
not like of course what is going on um
internally but what is in the media that
i can
speak to but if you allow me first i
want to say that it all started with the
blog
but then there have been an invitation
for complaints about the blog
and um i wanna clearly and firmly say
and state that i deny those allegations
that are circulating in the media
against me so that's clear
i'm someone who strongly believe in
respect
and human relationships and i think uh
if we have that respect
toward others said first but toward
others it's the best antidote to racism
discrimination mistreatment of others
so i'm against discriminating against
anyone
uh including myself of course but
against anyone
so that for me i wanna get it out
clearly
please so tell us about the blog
when did you start writing your blog in
july 2019
and why did you start to do that you
mean you have your research career
you're
an undergraduate or you're you're a
teacher as well
um you're working in the community you
have a full life what
what compelled you to to start a blog i
love to write
uh and i think it's it's a reflex that i
have from
war so i used to write my my diary in
arabic
and in french and i have them with me
that came from
with me in a box and went across three
provinces so i love to write so
uh in july 2019 i didn't have the chance
maybe to say what i wanted to say on a
platform so i decided to have my own
blog
and just write for the pleasure of
writing i write about
lebanon maybe half of the time i write
about canada
quebec here i just write uh
and express uh views in relation to what
is happening
in canada and in the world and i think
i'm seeing something very worrisome and
maybe that's
part of why maybe i'm writing because
i'm seeing that we are
uh in times where we can't
talk about things like look what's
happening in my story like we
people are afraid they may think things
um when they are at home privately but
they may not express them publicly
or maybe because of you know political
correctness or whatever i'm not that
type of person like when i
write or bambi the name of the person
writing is actually
the meaning of my first name rima it
means a little deer in arabic
and bambi is that deer so bambi's afkar
are bambi's thoughts
so i i what i write is actually who whom
i am what
my own thoughts uh privately and on that
blog
i sometimes write maybe you know
personal things about birthdays of loved
ones or whatever it's a blog right so
that's it and what kind of audience does
your blog have
well at first i thought it had maybe 10
people maybe first myself i was writing
for myself but i thought family
family members and then when that story
happened uh
i for once i searched i usually don't
have the time to do that
and i thought it was like really getting
2 000
on one day and then like i don't know
what another day i checked
500 something like that i thought oh my
goodness like i was
really thinking i'm writing you know i'm
using
uh during the pandemic my in-laws or my
parents sometimes with some
submissions or writing about the beirut
explosion
i interviewed friends about what they
are going through the financial crisis
you know
things like that right so it had
expanded beyond the small number of
people that you had assumed were reading
it
absolutely and what what were you okay
so
tell me about your thoughts about
people's inability to speak what have
you been
thinking or experiencing prior to this
this explosion of interest in your
particular case what had you been
sensing and was was that the culture at
large was that mount ellison what had
you been experiencing that was worrisome
to you
that is at large you know when we hear
stories about people
um being um being
silenced in one way or another or or uh
when we see
that people are being i don't know if
that's the term in english but
disreputable i mean being made into
uh jabulizing them you know uh saying
words you know uh
this or that racist or that just because
having the reputation attacked
yes exactly and uh so that and that
is actually it's ironically a
contradiction with where i come from
where we don't we have a powerful group
or
or more powerful than other groups but
we have lebanon has issues but
people still express their opinions
there
despite stories or you know extreme
stories of you know
kidding here and there you know but i
mean uh they can teach
uh freely they can criticize
freely and i do criticize
things there um and i have never
imagined in my whole life that my
problems would be from
canada and not like coming from
from where i come from but you see what
i mean
so what did you write about that got
that caused trouble
and and for how long to tell us all
about that
it's very hard to know precisely but i
but um you know some of the things it's
public information i'm not uh saying
anything that was that
that went in and emails or in in
social media from the university so or
or went
uh in the media actually if you read the
stories of being accused of being
racist of being you know that all these
terms like
encouraging sexual violence uh
um so what those were the accusations
against you they were accusations of
racist
racism they were accusations that you
were promoting sexual violence
yes um what else what else were you
accused of
it seems odd to be promoting sexual
violence but it's but i can explain
why perhaps perhaps people maybe younger
people
think in black and white and don't don't
see the nuances
and i can understand that when we are
young sometimes it's like that
but i i try i think i try to bring some
perspective by comparing you know places
worse than canada you know canada has
issues of course like all the countries
but canada is not
as bad as we think had it been that bad
i would have not
immigrated here my family would have not
i would have not chosen to stay
so so maybe i may have said uh
us in wars war times or
under certain radical groups you may
have a
rape culture and i by no means i meant
to be saying
uh minimizing the experience of people
going through uh through horrible things
like rape and then that sexuality so
that's
absolutely not the case but
um i think it's all about the blog in
all honesty all
what we hear in the media is not the
main thing
is the blog is it it's disturbing
uh and exactly exactly what happened to
you
so you were you were living what i would
presume was a pretty
comfortable and and happy life as you've
described being a teacher and a
researcher
you spun off this blog on the side and
then
what happened one day you were notified
by the university
tell us exactly the story i can tell you
but i want to say yes i'm extremely
happy even in the pandemic
even despite the beirut explosion and
everything like i'm finding my ways of
you know living coping with
new brunswick is amazing um for canada
but
but we're also lucky to be in the
semi-rural
areas where even the pandemic did not
hit
us as hard as toronto or bigger places
in montreal
so in that sense um it was all okay
until that february 22nd
where i can tell you that story because
it's my story that's my part so
and and it's in the media actually i was
um
i'm i was having symptoms of actually
like covet 19
i wasn't sure and i was very very very
sick and not
i usually run fast and jump and go on
the stairs and
i couldn't take the stairs i would stop
you know couldn't breathe and
uh so on that day the monday where it
happened i went
for testing was finally negative but i
went
came back did my work day and then and
at the end of the day i was lying on the
couch
thinking that i was resting i got a
phone call
from a kind former student telling me dr
azar
you're uh you need to know what is
happening and i thought are you okay
what is happening was worried
and he said no i'm fine you are in
trouble in big trouble
so the story started in the social media
i'm not on social media myself um
so for me i chose that blog because it's
what suits my personality what i
you know writing and having an enough
space to write and
so anyways i enjoy reading social media
and i do
but i i'm not on it so so i went i read
quickly and i thought
okay uh it's you know it was there
and this was where this was on twitter
this was all happening on twitter
or where was it i don't know if it was
happening on on
elsewhere or facebook i guess but i saw
the twitter myself
and then an email got out of the
university
publicly so not on twitter on facebook
um
or the public channels of the university
saying
um you know it's public so i'm not
saying what is not public
um trigger warning that blog we
dissociate ourselves from it and
and you know uh all and encouraging
complaints
okay so what people what were people
saying on twitter and who who was it
that would say it and how many of them
were there
do you know a lot uh and like it was
it was a big thing on social media like
um and and there has been
also at one point you know a threat of
violence on social media and things like
that
so it was it was then
i don't to forget that part when the the
there were
three student organizations asked for my
removal
from um my position at my university and
also
affiliations uh elsewhere like
university of new brunswick
invested in moncton as well so it
got really okay so i want to zero in on
this so there's
there's some students primarily on
social media on twitter primarily and
they're complaining about your blog
and they're students who are part of
student organizations
and do you and then the student
organizations themselves three of them
are contacting your the people that
you're working for or with
suggesting that you're not the sort of
person they should be associating with
and asking for your removal
exactly you said there were lots of of
students doing this and i'd like to get
something
an estimate of something like a number
so does a lot mean
500 or does it mean five
so in between maybe i don't know
precisely the answer
well the reason i'm asking is because
one of the things i'm curious about is
just how many people have to complain
before
complaints are taken with some degree of
seriousness now i've dealt with
ethics boards for example at my own
university and
they have a policy that every complaint
should be investigated thoroughly and
i'm not very fond of that policy
particularly because
there are a lot of people who cause a
fair bit of trouble
for absolutely no reason and it seems to
me that complaints need to pass
something
approximating a reasonable threshold
before they're dealt with
let's say seriously and so you know it's
striking when you're talking about this
that you don't know how many people
actually came after you because they
came after you on on social media
and it's certainly not in the hundreds
it's unlikely to be
and correct me if i'm wrong it's
unlikely to be in the dozens
is it is it 10 is it 15
and were they students who were actually
in your classes or were they just people
who read your blog
and and what were they objecting to in
your blog exactly what did you say that
was
in principle or do you even know what it
is that they're
upset about what i've read is that you
made some claim that canada wasn't
systemically racist
that wasn't the right way of looking at
the country and is there
so and to me that means now is that the
case now that at a university if i stand
up and say that i don't believe that
the lens of systemic racism is the
proper way to analyze canada
especially compared to other countries
that now i'm so reprehensible that i
deserve to be
suspended if a couple of people object
is that
the situation that we're looking at or
am i being too hard on the university
well i think it's hard to answer that
question
i know the numbers that i know uh of now
i know them because of what happened and
how many people but before i didn't know
anything
i personally found it amazing that my
university my employer that i
that i love and respect you know
did not call me to tell me what was
happening that that
i learned in that did your union
my i my union is doing what needs to be
done
and i'm very grateful but uh but i
didn't know
about that i knew it this is how i knew
it and then after that first call
friends from nova scotia amherst nova
scotia
called hearing in the news and the radio
it was all
everywhere um i have to admit
uh i may be wrong but there may have
been a
flavor for that during that month so
like it was
like like my story was sort of
scapegoat for something that is much
bigger than
a deer a simple deer a silly deer
sometimes
we can we're not allowed to write
serious things or silly things or be
wrong
or change our mind so what precisely
i don't know but i do i personally am
allergic to identity politics
given my background so i i um
may have written things about that or
or about uh you know what it's hard to
tell but you're still not sure
you're still not sure what it is that
okay so you're not sure
exactly who you offended or how many of
them there are and you're not exactly
sure why you offended them
and you're so unsure that what you say
is that as far as you're concerned
you can't safely write down what you
think despite the fact that
you have your opinions given where you
came from given the fact that you've
immigrated here that
you can take a look at canada from the
perspective of an insider and an
outsider
you're not sure what your crime is no
but now because it's in this in the
media
i can talk to that i'm so i'm um
said that i'm not respecting the
confidentiality of the process of the
investigational report it's in the media
there is an allegation well you get it
you get the chance to defend yourself in
any case i mean
you've been suspended correct in the
fall
okay and you said your university didn't
even call you when all this blew up
which is typical in my experience of the
way institutions are reacting to this
sort of thing so
an unnamed number of students made
comments
that you have views that are in some
sense reprehensible even though you
don't know what they are
and the response of your university
despite the fact that you have tenure
that you're an accomplished scientist
that you're a popular undergraduate
researcher
that you have tenure the response of
your university was to not eat call you
but suspend you for the fall what
pending an investigation
an investigation into what exactly have
they told you what you did wrong
of course i i saw those complaints um
and i can tell you i think that part i
can say it is most of them are related
to the blog and that's fine
people have the right not to like what
you say
what i say what anyone else is saying
that's fine
but when we get into uh false
allegations
um it's a different story there's also a
difference between
having the right not to like what you
say on your blog
and aggregating behind your back and
conspiring to contact all your employers
and to insist that you be removed
because
you're reprehensible and hypothetically
a danger to the
let's say the safety of students and to
have you removed from your position and
have your reputation dragged through the
mud and have you exposed in the media
i mean that's not merely not liking what
you said that's an
all-out attack and it's amazing to me
that the
this handful of students an unspecified
number
has the power to move the administration
to
produce such a dramatic response and you
and you you keep
um wavering in some sense as to the
nature of your crimes you said you think
it might you think it's likely the blog
but i guess there are allegations that
go outside the blog as well
have you ever had trouble with your
students in classes
that have resulted in complaints never
all those who know me personally who can
guess
who i am in the blog because i
think it shows a little bit that
you know i write i write or write a lot
so you can
guess you can see you can make links you
can see so for example i may criticize
uh a certain politician in one
one blog but i can say thank you on
another one for doing something good you
know i'm writing
because we cannot comment on art media
articles
um many times you know the comment
section is closed right
so for me it's my way of doing it so if
if they well it doesn't seem to me that
it's something that needs to be
justified i mean first of all
you're a citizen of a free country you
have a right to express yourself any way
that you see fit second of all
you're a tenured professor and your
thoughts actually protected
to a fair degree and it's protected
broadly so that you can think broadly
and the fact that this has happened
despite your tenure
well i guess part of the question that
people who are watching might be asking
is why the hell should they care about
this and
the reason i believe that people should
care about this first of all is that
what happens in the universities ends up
happening everywhere else
very very rapidly and if it can happen
to someone like you
it seems to me that it can happen to
anyone at any time and any place
and this this this unbelievable
cowardice that our institutions show in
the in the face of
unwarranted allegations as long as
they're the right flavor is something
that should be tremendously worrisome to
everyone now
in your situation is also particularly
peculiar i might say because
you don't seem to be the right sort of
target for this sort of targeting
you know because you're using the
terminology that i don't
appreciate in the least i mean you're
female you're an immigrant
you're you're at least in principle part
of the communities that the people who
push this sort of nonsense are
hypothetically trying to protect so why
is it because you are in one of these
victimized categories and you dared to
say something that wasn't
in accordance with the necessary moral
uh ideology that you've been targeted so
let's let's find out this
you came to canada from beirut okay
what's your experience of this country
this racist
oppressive systemically biased country
what's your
impression of this place it's a
prestigious university
i mean i love my university i did my all
my studies at
the great universe i work with greater
all the universities
so i'm saying if canada was that
racist with me at least because some
people would say that's your story it's
not the story of others
i'm not the only one who speaks like
that you lived in montreal
yes for how long for 15 years okay what
was it like
i've lived in montreal i know what
montreal is like what's montreal like
montreal because people
are open-minded people are people
respect you you know they they
you can say what you wish you could have
it's it's a
quebec is sometimes mischaracterized
sadly but i defend quebec i don't know
if there's something that bothers
other some people so i'm not just from
beirut uh lebanese canadian i have
i'm canadian first and foremost but
lebanese canadian
uh i'm quebecer i lived in quebec i love
ontario when i visit vancouver
and the west part of the country i told
myself oh why didn't my family be great
there it's fascinating you know every
place is beautiful
uh in canada and so when i come back to
what
may have bothered them i think you put
your finger on it
um maybe they want it if you read the
about of the bambi's vlog
you see that that deer does not want to
fit in any group
and say and put in a box so i'm supposed
to be
racial you know be a poor
me i don't have food i don't i don't
like to be victimized personally in my
life
even now with what is happening to me i
am i
think i'm a dignified person uh so
so so in that sense um i like
the term invisible minority visible
minority you know
the terms that used to be used in quebec
my time when i immigrated
i see myself more in them and then like
like
put us divided into your this group that
group and and
um you know sectarianism
or or not like right so you're supposed
to be first of all you're female so
hypothetically you're oppressed because
you're female even though
the evidence for suppression of females
in academia is very very uh
it's actually females dominate over
males in terms
of numerical proportion in most
disciplines
it's not the case in the stem fields but
everywhere else it's the case not only
especially in terms of graduates
produced it might not be the case at the
highest levels of
distinction in the academic hierarchy
although that's changing pretty rapidly
so you should actually fit into at least
two oppressed categories female and
an immigrant right and and so and so
the rule here is that if you're in both
of those categories
victimized by the intersection between
those two categories that there's a
particular political view
you better have or else and or else in
your case is everywhere else you get
suspended because a few people complain
it's what the hell is going on with the
administration i don't understand what
they're doing
i really don't understand i can't
understand why they didn't have the
courtesy actually i can
courtesy to call you because the sad
truth is
is that as soon as a few people complain
everyone who isn't directly involved
runs scared and looks for someone to
sacrifice
yes i can how can i say it when you i
wanna reply to the women part
my own sister is a is um
a journalist and and defends women's
rights and
in their root and uh you know there you
know that
women have a long journey right for
equality
and yet my sister does not use terms
like you know that does
you know toward men and that that
i don't know how to say it but in a
constructive way
she does what she doesn't baby may have
had a post actually on that
um so so that's one thing the second
thing is
you're right there is there is
scapegoating maybe but there is fear
people are afraid and i don't just well
the way the way to deal with
fear isn't to offer someone up as a
sacrificial victim and then to run
hiding into the closet
that's not the way to deal with fear
that all that does is feed the mob as
far as i'm concerned because
now they've managed to go after your job
successfully i don't understand
like what sort of message is that
sending to the to the
students who went after you to begin
with
what the message is as well if you
organize yourself into a little mob
and bully like mad then you can make
major administrations
count out to your political will despite
the fact that it
massively disrupts someone innocent's
life
well that's a hell of a message for an
educational institution absolutely and
it's not just
my life my family my small family my
larger
family and in lebanon like it's it's
like people are traumatized by that
story and
uh there is a silent majority of
students or or not yeah like 97
yes who are uh who are like you
who think what is that and unlike me
but me i i'm calm i take things calmly
and i
think try to how to solve things and
strategically and what to do what not to
do
so but i see around me how much people
are affected
uh and i am of course affected but i
mean i'm trying to
fight for me who was it exactly that
sent you the note
signifying your suspension
well it's not a secret it's two
administrators um
but the two particular persons but uh
for me it doesn't at that stage
is it's all public so all what i'm
saying is not that i'm saying something
that i'm not supposed to be saying it's
all public and
those names well it isn't it isn't also
it also isn't clear what you're supposed
to be saying and what you aren't
supposed to be saying i mean
you have every right to let people know
what's going on in fact i think in some
sense you have an obligation to let
people know what's going on right and
because look at this isn't right this
isn't
this isn't appropriate especially given
that you're protected by tenure it's not
appropriate anyways
but it's particularly not appropriate
because you're hypothetically
protected by tenure and so
on what grounds were you suspended
i still don't understand what you did
what where's the evidence that you did
something so reprehensible that a
suspension was the appropriate response
why didn't they say at minimum well you
can continue your teaching and we'll
take a look at this but
given your stellar record and your loyal
service for the last 13 years continue
what you're doing and
you know we'll take a look at this but
we're on your side given
your past behavior is there anything
that's
lurking back there that makes you
nervous
about your performance no but let me
tell you something what happened at
mount ellison university and is
happening elsewhere
but particularly here is a symptom of
what is happening in our country or
or maybe beyond actually so i take it
like that it's a symptom that we do have
a serious problem as you said like
tenured professors
not being able to express ideas debate
ideas challenge students with ideas we
do have a big problem
well not only ideas these your what you
claim
is not only what was commonplace is
commonplace
among the vast majority of people in
canada but was completely
uncontroversial five years ago
it's not like you're pushing forward
some radical ideas
to question the idea that canada is
systemically racist let's take a look at
that a little bit so when you move to
montreal
you're an outsider you're an immigrant
what's your experience there what did
you make friends right away were you
shunned were you
prejudiced against in any particular way
what happened to you in montreal
it was an amazing experience of course
sometimes you may
meet someone who may may say a word that
may sound like being raised so
i say so what like it's great racist
have the right to exist in a so-called
races like myself
have the right to exist in a community
or in a society so
what i'm trying to say is that it is
normal in a society to have people who
are
truly for racist or is or radicals or
or but the problem is when radicals
start imposing their views
instead of accepting that not everyone
thinks the same
like i am i consider myself as a
classical liberal
historically i thought center left but i
don't like to put words so essentially
some people would say why are you
talking to dr peterson some people
most of the people i know would be
jealous of me to be talking to you in
all honesty but some people would say
uh why are you talking you know being
perceived as being too
you know right left things i don't care
about science
uh i am going to tell you something
about
me and identity politics when i moved to
montreal it's full of people of the same
background as me
so if you take a cab driver chances are
the car driver would be either of
haitian origins or lebanese origins
so sometimes um when i open my mouth in
french they can guess my accent or
we realize we're both same background
start chatting they ask me where are you
from
and i can see the religious symbol in
the car it's actually
i share that same religion but i would
answer from beirut i am from beru this
is general
they will say where exactly in beirut i
know where they want to come to and it's
not because they are mean
because it's curious it's built in them
they want to know which religion
and me i say oh the green light near the
green
line sorry green line you know what i
mean like between east and west beirut
so that so for me my religion is
her personal my my whatever part of
identity
it's no one's business so it's like it's
it's
identities are complex right we have
multiple identical
i don't know what i mean um but
so so that is how i've always approached
things and now that i'm seeing that if
we say if we denounce
these things in our society we are being
called races or being called
radicals like it doesn't make any sense
to my sense so your experience when you
went to montreal it
was a positive one and you enjoyed
living in the city and and then you went
off you did well in cjep in in the upper
echelons of high school and then you
went off to university of montreal
and you were successful there did you
encounter anything that you regarded as
systemic racism while you were in
montreal
no not in montreal not in toronto not in
new brunswick
personally um of course we know the
history and history of canada and
pockets of residual
things that you know unfair unjust but
you know
i think systemic racism or whatever we
want to call it or diversity or things
we have to be careful not to be saying
slogans and empty slogans for me
diversity
i live it i i live it because i allow
myself to think
uh this will change my mind my spouse is
not of the same background as me
absolutely not uh and so so that's
that's diversity right uh uh diversity
is i
i tolerate i think you you can be of
that
trend of we call it walkism
why not as long as you don't impose on
me
or if you see what i mean or you can be
um
you can be even to think of religion now
not just muslim but islamists if you're
not doing something
with it um if you see what i mean to to
society or realize
so my point is we have the right to
think
whatever we wish in a democratic society
in a free
society especially in universities as
you said the lighthouse
of of knowledge of exchange of ideas
and if it's there it's it's getting dark
how how would it be elsewhere
have you been have you been able to face
any of your accusers do you know who
they are were they were they former
students who were in your classes
are they people who are hell-bent on
pushing an ideological agenda who
virtually know nothing about you
i mean do you do you have any ideas not
speak to that part but maybe i can say
in general that
some name some may not many not a man
you know but
i will i will just say that
um it is just so unfair
absurd uh it's there is no word that i
can describe
uh it's not because it's happening to me
surreal yes siree and that's the words
yeah surreal no one should go through
that no one
for whatever reasons think you know okay
so
so let's talk about that for a minute so
back to that day that you
knew that something was afoot exactly
what happened so a former student
alerted you that something was up
and you checked out twitter and you saw
accusations about
your character and about what you've
written flying around on twitter
and the the the people who were
producing these accusations
were parts of student organizations what
kind of student organizations were they
part of
i think i can stick to that part because
it's in the media
um so divest was one of them that was
mount a another one was
uh black student association and the
other one
ironically was um
the rose campaign it's about the
massacre at polytechnic
and i it means the world to me
polytechnic is university of montreal
right so every year i
i commemorate i i you know i participate
so that that
one group was that group um saying that
i encourage
gender violence sexual violence and
through my writing
on the blog um so
and that was because you because you
were pointing out that that
such activity is not part and parcel of
the central culture in canada but an
aberration
i was perhaps talking about i don't know
um
honor killing in some places you know so
i read a media about a
a certain young woman who was killed and
i put a candle you know
you know her memory and i wrote
something you know comment
about that so that's because i didn't
it it's like and how is it that you're
glorifying
sexual violence by doing that exactly i
have no idea
i wish i could answer but i um
okay so that that particular um uh
accusation not only i've been thinking
lately that there are
about about deception the use of
deception and
you know there are lies that are just
about true but they're just
sort of they're not quite true and so
you sneak them by because
they're close enough to the truth maybe
to pass but then there are lies that are
the antithesis of the true antithesis of
the truth right they're they're
anti-truths
and it seems to me that the accusations
that you're glorifying sexual violence
fall in the antithesis category of
untruth not only is it a lie
it's the opposite of the truth yes but
when it's about the blog i can
understand
i can understand uh because they don't
like it they're
emotional about it i write that i can
understand but when we come to talk
about a behavior
a situation an incident that has never
happened
that is a different story and how how do
you separate out those two
i think it all came in the context of
the
complaints and the the the situation of
the blog and
and i but i don't know for sure because
i
remember i didn't know how it started at
the beginning but in
but logically it came when
through that you know the process of the
i call it speed mobbing because it was
like speed dating
uh it was so fast so uh
um it felt like uh
how can i say it with all respect like
having
bar king dogs coming at you all at once
yeah so how about we call this assault
yes yes absolutely look i've watched
lots of people respond to twitter mobs
over the last four years
and my experience has been that being
mob by 20 people on twitter especially
when an administrative organization then
climbs in that's enough to seriously
damage someone
and most people climb back and apologize
as fast as they possibly can
and it's no wonder because it's very
unnerving and destabilizing
yes and so you you're someone who
who is obviously deeply opposed to such
things as sexual
exploitation clearly and
and assault and the use of arbitrary
violence and
nonetheless you're targeted by precisely
that kind of behavior
and then it's encouraged in every
possible way as far as i can tell by
the administration who immediately fold
in the most cowardly of possible ways
and so i just this is just it's
outrageous and yeah i can't understand
why there isn't more noise about it
i can't you're the wrong target clearly
thank you i can't speak for the
motivation but i can speak of
not standing up for me what i see i saw
the whole canada stood up for me like
the people writing uh amazing
comments on the gofundme people donating
people like that like
like i i'm overwhelmed by that i see
people standing
right right and i'm still into the
thinking thinking and i want to thank
them if they are listening because i
didn't have the time to complete
or my personalized thank you no too okay
so
so 10 000 people support you and 20
people complain
and yet the university suspends you so
like what the hell's up with that
exactly i mean how come there's no
proportionality of response
if the if the overwhelming body of the
population is supportive of what you
of who you are let's say and what you've
done which is
nothing that that deserves the kind of
treatment that you've been through
why isn't the university as sensitive to
the public opinion
supporting you as they are sensitive to
the hypothetical public opinion
damning you do you have like do you how
do you understand that
well you said this was surreal and i
want to delve more into that
so let's we'll deal with the
public opinion issue in a bit so let's
go back to that monday so this is
starting to unfold you see this twitter
mob
developing there's these student
factions
um including people who are supporting
causes that you support so that's the
the there was a massacre of six women at
at
in montreal about 20 years ago and
that's commemorated every december 6th
and that's one of these student
organizations you say you commemorate
that as well
so you're actually there's no reason for
you to be perceived as someone who's
antithetical to that particular cause
all right so these students are
organizing do you even know if they're
students
i don't know if i can answer that
question uh but they
yes i think okay okay okay okay
well it's it's still stunning to me that
you don't exactly know who your
accuser you don't know who your accusers
are you don't know how many of them
there are and you don't know exactly
what it is that you've done wrong
and so what are you supposed to be doing
in the interim are you supposed to be
like re-examining your life don't you
have to take
diversity inclusivity and um um
equity training uh i think it's in the
public
so i can say it's yes and the media so
that's mandated
it was written so that's i'm not talking
about something that is internal
i'm expecting all what i should be
respecting confidentiality
of the process but it's in the media so
i can say yes
that is something that went to the
student in an email
in the stuff okay so despite the fact
that you haven't been like say convicted
of any wrongdoing
you're required to take diversity
inclusivity and equity training
and that's despite your background let's
say so what exactly
first of all are you going to do that
and second of all what exactly are you
supposed to learn by doing that
what behavior do you think it is that or
attitudes are you supposed to
uh mend and and alter
i'm gonna tell you a story from my past
when i was 14 and you can guess if i'm
gonna take it when i was 14
14 i think yes i was the delegate of the
class
in beirut and and a group of armed men
heavily armed you know kalashnikov in
children
came and said we should go to the
students to applaud to a certain
politician and i'm not maybe it doesn't
matter and i forgot whom
um so i stood up and i said no we are
students our place is here not to go
for you know political ideology we're
not going and they
they insisted actually they took all the
students of all the schools around
and a friend of mine that i recently met
in beirut told me you know what lima do
you know why you
you did not go i said she reminded me of
the story i went to hide in the washroom
i did not go with them so i so they were
heavily armed and i did not go
with them um
i think i'm also i think i'm a
reasonable flexible person
had that been at the beginning uh i
would have perhaps
considered perhaps going and listening
okay or
perhaps but after all this does it make
any sense
um that's all i'm gonna say it's like
it's
uh i know that let's not just talk about
my story because it's the symptom
it's happening uh across um it's
like okay and and it's
insulting to people who um
do not need to be taking such things
into the impose
yeah and you might say that i mean you
you're a highly educated person
it's not easy to attain a faculty
position it's actually quite difficult
and only a minority of people manage it
you have to
be smart and you have to be curious and
you have to be at least a decent teacher
and you have to be a good researcher
you have to be able to work with people
your co-authors your peers
you have to be efficient it's a hard job
and then
and it's also a job that requires and
you also have clinical background so
you're
actually technically social socially
skilled and and highly trained and then
the question is
just exactly who the hell would be
teaching the diversity inclusivity and
equity course
so that'd be someone in all likelihood
with a master's in social work
who's going to lecture you on your
ethical duty to others
and assume that you are in a position
that requires
exactly that kind of education despite
the fact of your advanced training
and that speaks to the motivation behind
this sort of thing as well
especially when it's forced and be
because by forcing that on you
and having you accept that that's that's
essentially an
admission of your guilt and the
necessity that you've come to realize
for yourself that you need to be
retrained by someone who holds those
particular political opinions and that
level of training
there's no evidence whatsoever you
likely know this as a psychological
researcher
that any of this diversity diversity
inclusivity and equity training
any of this implicit bias retraining has
any positive effects
whatsoever there's no evidence that the
implicit association test that purports
to measure
implicit bias is a valid test it
certainly isn't accurate enough to be
used
for the purposes that it is being used
for it's turned into a
political weapon there's no excuse for
it whatsoever
and the human resources departments that
are pushing this sort of thing
it's reprehensible right to the core and
i can't believe that institutions are
falling prey to
to the blandishments of those who are
pushing this that's a pure power play to
speak to motivation so and it puts you
in your place which is exactly
what's being uh hoped for whatever that
place is
since it's not even clear what it is
that you did
absolutely i still don't know what it is
that you did but
that the thing that's so frightening it
doesn't really matter okay so
back to monday so a twitter war is
developing there's student
groups who are sending complaints about
you
to who uh supposedly to the university
to oh yeah there's a anti-racism policy
and they email i'm not saying something
and i'm not so to be saying
it's uh anti-racism response
okay so there's an administrative branch
at the university set up to deal with
anti-racism let's say so it's a
political branch it's a politicized
branch
and their job is to do exactly to you
what they did do to you and so those
were the people who were complained to
what about your
your your department you mentioned
political honesty it's a policy
it's an internal policy like harassment
policy and entertainment yeah
yeah and there's an administrative
bureaucracy that's associated with it
and this is a this is a this is an
expression of their ability to
fulfill their mandate let's say given
that they're searching for things to do
and you're the sort of ant you're the
sort of racist that they've decided to
target
which shows you exactly how much useful
activity there is lying around if you're
the sort of person they're going after
the racists at mount ellison must be in
relatively short supply
yeah i i would say yes i agree because
if it's like and i told you classical
liberal
and the center you know if that is not
tolerated how can we
tolerate someone to the real right
whichever have the right to be right
right
but real right or so like it's it's
it's too much like we i don't know what
to say because you can look at it from
different
angles there's that political thing the
freedom
uh academic freedom definitely
but also free expression in the world
because uh societies look
up to universities as as a uh
for for that so if professors cannot or
talk uh cannot uh communicate
and and and debate i don't i didn't see
any
student from my university writing on
the blog
i saw someone who wrote and i replied
um but not from the university but no
one
like why don't they challenge that bambi
and write and say it
doesn't you know when it the story
happened
it didn't happen it's it could have been
a platform for debate
uh for uh you know uh exchanging if you
if you buy the line that people
aggregate themselves into groups
based on power and pursue their own
selfish in their own selfish interest
within that group
there's no space for free debate between
individuals that's not
part and parcel of the entire doctrine
it's not like
it's not like there's no free speech
within the confines of doctrines like
that that the
notion doesn't exist because there's no
sovereign individuals there's no
exchange of rational information
there's no place for debate so the whole
issue of free speech is moot
there's just power and the expression of
power between different groups
and there is fear because when you
silence or try to silence someone or
isolate someone
people around are afraid yeah well i
can't i can't help but think that those
who claim that social institutions are
predicated on the arbitrary expression
of power
are precisely those who predicate their
social behavior on the
on the principle of power and they
misread everyone else and i don't think
there's any evidence at all that
well-socialized people who are
functioning productively and
cooperatively in society
are basing their social interactions on
the arbitrary expression of power
that isn't my experience with people
unless they're unless there's something
wrong with them
and then they default to power in all
their relationships
but there's no place for rational debate
in the in the in the on the ideological
front that insists on such things as
systemic racism
okay so monday back to monday again
how long after these complaints arise
are you sanctioned are you are it
how long is it until you're told that
you can't teach in the fall
uh i think i'm not talking about the
details but there has been a process of
course the
investigation and the report and uh and
and after that the decision was that uh
from
i'm suspended without pay from now until
uh
december the first and it's without pay
as well
without pay and did the
report suspending you without pay detail
your hypothetical crimes
report the decision made based on the
independent report
and who who was who made up this
independent who generated this
independent report
maybe these things i can't talk about
because it would be part of arbitration
and all that
but i it's not that i don't want to chat
with you uh but i know i understand
it's funny that the privacy of the
people that are doing this to you is
protected and your privacy isn't i
actually don't think that's funny at all
and i suspect they're doing just
fine with their continual uh salary
payments and their lack of suspension
over the next few months
so it seems like a pretty one-sided
power play to me you can't say anything
you're suspended and yet they're
protected
yes and and the media the same story
that is false has been repeated and
recently has been repeated so yes
definitely you're absolutely right
what's the false story the false story i
think because of the media
i can talk about it the fourth story is
that i uh when
you maybe and just on that topic that
the student
is saying is that i did not
i did not want to use the pronouns of
the student
and uh and that i said the student
is brainwashed and uh from what
the discussion chat so far you had with
me or what you've read or what of my
values what i told you about respect
would i ever
tell someone these things in those terms
um
uh it's um
it's i don't know how to say it's uh
well we already decided that it was
surreal it's real
yes no no and
okay so
can i help something myself yeah yes you
can say anything you want
it's actually about that story of the
pronouns um you know some people like to
be called with pronouns some people
don't like to be called from some people
have pronouns
after their name you don't i don't uh
some people and it's fine you know
when we want to be respected yeah it's
not fine if it's insisted upon and the
punishment is that if you don't use them
you lose your job
that's actually not the least bit fine
i'll tell you more than that
then you're i'm happy you said that
because when when your story came out
um i listened carefully and i would i
with my heart and actually when we spoke
about yours
your book at one point and and the
attempt to try to cancel it and
so so i listened i listened to people's
the opposite they were angry at you and
all that on tv
and i thought okay what is going on here
and i
told myself i think he's seeing
something we're not seeing
you know something when you talk about
imposing control i could see it because
i come from a place where i could see
these things happening
so i saw it at one point i stepped back
and i said but is it a big deal to
refuse to resurrect always i had that
thought no yeah well believe me i've had
that thought many times
you were right now i can tell you my
story
is the evidence of how much you are
right i'll tell you why
because i didn't even say it even so it
can happen
to you even without saying it
if you see what i mean i see what you
mean
it's the same slouching monster that i
saw five years ago
it's not amusing it's not fun to see
i don't find it i don't find it uh what
would you say reassuring to be right
i would rather have been wrong i could
see a power play and i could also see a
corruption of the idea of identity
it's not that identity isn't merely what
you feel you are
at any given point an identity is
something you negotiate with others
you have to negotiate it with others
because they have to know what the rules
are
if you can change the rules and make
them arbitrary at any point then how can
anyone play with you and maybe if
you're setting up a game that no one can
play you're doing that because you're
the one that has the problem with power
just maybe and so maybe that's a club
that can be then used on people if
you're of the sort of the nature that
wants to use a club
it's like why the hell are these people
after you you don't seem particularly
harmful to me
as far as i can tell thank you you know
i mean
your research is devoted towards helping
people you're
an educator who's obviously um
what would you say motivated by the
desire to teach young people and to
bring them forward not to exercise your
arbitrary power over them
and yet you're targeted by this so
what's this done to you
and to your family
my what breaks my heart the most is my
family
in beirut that's what breaks my heart
the most but um
of course my spouse as well and all the
friends and everyone but my parents they
are in their 80s they went through the
beirut explosion
they survived it there's the financial
crisis
uh there are implications uh a lot of
ambitions to many people and and
people who are just sad to see this
happen it is sad
it's sad yeah it's sad it is sad and why
sad why do you say sad exactly and the
people that are responding to this
what's sad about it
i mean you guys had your share of
trouble in lebanon
because we are at that stage in canada
it breaks my heart
maybe the the most to think that
like well i tell you the effect one
friend childhood friend when she read
the news about it and it because it's
all everywhere it was in spanish written
somewhere i don't know
she called me they were thinking of
immigrating to canada and she said i'm
scared now maybe i should wait a little
bit maybe lebanon situation will get
better
she said that and i was like uh
i said some period of time history
try pass you know i don't but i said
it's true that it is
un it's unimaginable like um
in lebanon we look up to the canada
to the to the western world if you want
or by extension like
we you know uh people value democracy
people get killed sometimes when it's
extreme because of their thoughts
but uh when people can say whatever they
wish on facebook social media
um i critis i
i don't know how to say it but i
criticized
uh one powerful group but not only
everyone but that powerful group so many
times
and and yet i did not get that treatment
from that powerful group there
and so what what what do you what do you
pla
what are your plans now your life has
been thrown up in the air
i mean you must have been going through
your teaching career with a
fine-tooth comb trying to figure out you
know if you did
i mean what's really horrible if if
something like this happens to you
if you're a decent person is that you
torture yourself to death about what
your guilt might be
yeah but you know as i said like
my um people around me are losing sleep
i i i'm not yet i don't know what's
gonna happen but not yet
because you know what i think when we
know ourselves
we know the truth we it like no matter
what you're gonna be reading about you
this is not you like you are you dr
peterson
i know you i from really and i hear
about you you talk to me it's not
what people would say you know nasty
things sometimes you went through
difficult times
some people would say he he deserves
that like i
i i i get out of my mind when i see
someone saying that to
anyone but particularly to you for all
what you
did and went through and all that so i'm
it's just sad again i'm saying we got to
that stage in canada where we don't want
to listen like
why can't i say what is the meaning of
let's say systemic racism because you
mentioned it
what does it mean you as a scientist we
uh
define you know we measure we chat about
concept we write
reviews like concept analysis we talk to
stakeholders literature all that
so why can't we say okay what are we
talking about here where does
is it coming from where is it imposed on
us from
uh you know uh i i think i have some
hype
this was not my expertise but i just
know that
it's why can't we say it like it's
is it a dogma is it an idea is it what
is it
why why why can't we well i think it's a
claim
i think it's a claim the fundamental
claim is quite straightforward i think i
think the claim is that
people who hold positions of authority
first of all there aren't positions of
authority there are
positions of arbitrary power and though
the people who hold those so all
hierarchical societies are based on
positioning of
arbitrary power and that power serves
that hierarchy and the people within it
it exploits those at the bottom of the
hierarchy it exploits those on the
outside of the harker if you hold one of
those arbitrary positions of power
then you got it through ill-gotten means
and that's the fundamental claim of
systemic racism or that's what's
underlying it it's not the fundamental
claim of systemic racism exactly it's
more like the fundamental claim of the
ideology that generates slogans like
systemic racism
and it's part of the assault on the idea
of merit
so i was writing about that today i mean
the things that
you can tell me what you think about
let's look at hiring practices
at canadian universities for example
okay so
my sense has been this i've said on many
many hiring committees the first is is
that
they're extremely merit-based
so the first thing that the typical
committee does is they
rank order candidates and there's like
100 candidates for every position that's
awarded so there's a
plenty of people to choose from
they look at publications
quality of publications because as a
professor one of the things you're
supposed to do is generate publications
so if you're a graduate student and you
generated many high quality publications
that's a good predictor that you're
going to do the same thing in the future
they look at teaching ability that be
secondary at most places especially if
they're research oriented be more
primary at a teaching oriented
university so teaching
ratings from students so the
stakeholders have a
have a a say in that that's a powerful
say
um and then also evidence of
interpersonal
ability so you look at letters of
reference and so on documenting
the candidates ability to be a good
colleague and to get along with people
and not to be a troublesome thorn in the
side let's say
for for arbitrary reasons and so those
are perfectly reasonable hiring criteria
they
have nothing to do with the maintenance
of the power of any particular group and
then
there's even more than that because once
the candidate pool has been winnowed out
the probability that a university hiring
committee is going to give
preferential treatment to someone who's
qualified within that pool but who shows
who's let's say a member of a group
that's been historically disadvantaged
to use all this bloody terminology
the probability that that person is
going to get more than a fair shake is
very very high and that's been the case
for at least
30 years and it isn't clear to me that
that's always been for the best but
nonetheless that's the situation
so to think about those institutions you
canadian universities american
universities too for that matter
as somehow being predicated on arbitrary
power is
it's not again it's not a lie it's an
anti-truth it's
exactly the opposite of the real
situation and
you know you might say you look at
canada i know one of your crimes was
suggesting that
among countries rather than among the
hypothetical utopian visions of
ideologically adult students canada does
pretty damn well
by historical standards and by current
world comparative standards
you know and you might say well there's
still detrimental behaviors that are
embedded within the culture but
in the case of university hiring
committees it isn't obvious to me how
they could possibly be more fair than
they are
they they strive so hard to be fair that
they bend over backwards
at least to some degree in the opposite
direction
and so so okay so you didn't detain your
position as a consequence of some
arbitrary expression of power
you're actually qualified to to do the
job that you have
and yet you're going to be mandated to
take diversity inclusivity and equity
training you know i've been thinking for
a long time where the line is
that divides the reasonable left from
the unreasonable left
and it's certainly equity conceived as
equality of outcome
when you push that line that's too far
but i think the whole diversity
inclusivity and equity slogan mantra
people who mouth that and push it
they've gone too far
that's the line right there and you can
tell that because it's being imposed by
fiat on people like you i agree
um it's actually it breaks my heart that
the left has been
the beautiful laughter i know hijacked
type of thing but that that movement
that is
radical insane it's realistic i don't
know
that but i don't think it's just the
left i think it's it's
spreading but i mean that left that i i
would think you know the rights of
workers the rights of
you know immigrants like like i'm
thinking i thinking that that whatever
movement is
using that's my personal opinion and uh
maybe that would get shot at for saying
it but
um well you've already been shot at so
now you can say what you want
yes so i think that it's
it's how can i say it
it's not because someone is of my same
uh background
precise uh place where i came from
religion whatever
that that person would represent me
better than someone
else who is more competent as you said
who makes more
sense right well that's an insane part
of this doctrine to begin with the idea
that
that these arbitrary groupings your
your gender your sex your race
me means that you have something more
profound in common
for example than with people who share
more different differentiated elements
of your character your ambition
your values more importantly yes and
i'll tell you
uh in lebanon they have quotas of based
on religion i get obsessed with religion
for to be a president you have to be
christian marine
to be prime minister sunni muslim et
cetera et cetera uh
so i cannot be a president there and not
write for a specific part of whatever
not prime minister you know so all this
is that the
people of lebanon right now are saying
no
to sectarianism they know it didn't work
it was unfair
they don't want it whereas here we are
trying to bring that
to us here uh there is a reason why our
all our collective agreements protect
merit right on merit and you said merit
based hiring and all that i do believe
personally that it is
insulting for me to tell me that i'm
gonna get a job
because i am lebanese or i am
this or that well it's particularly
insulting if you're qualified
absolutely so so it is particularly
insulting if i'm qualified definitely
and uh
so so to come to tell me that let's say
if we're
gonna talk about one part of the
identity you mentioned gender but could
be let's say skin color right
so what does someone from palestine who
happens to have a black skin
have in common with the president of the
united states a former president
who happens to have do they have in
common like
or or someone uh from haiti driving a
cabin montreal like no there's culture
there's language
look as social scientists we could agree
that
one of the factors that might give
people some
similarity of experience would be race
or ethnicity
right i mean it but it's one factor
among many yes
and if i was writing today about what
predicts success in complex western
organizations okay so
what predicts success if you look at it
psychometrically so you break down all
the attributes of people
and you decide which measurable
attribute would be associated with
socioeconomic position let's say
well the best two predictors are general
cognitive ability
which is basically ability to learn and
to deal with complex abstractions and
that predicts
performance in high complexity jobs and
high complexity jobs involve a lot of
change and necessity for learning so
ability to learn an ability to solve
complex problems predicts success in
jobs that require the ability to learn
and the ability to deal with complex
situations and that's measurable
sats measure that gres measure that the
lsats measure that and
they don't measure it perfectly but they
measured better than anything else we
know
and the other thing that predicts
universally in some sense across
job categories is conscientiousness and
that's hard work essentially
industriousness
orderliness but industriousness predicts
better so amount of hours put in
the ability to formulate ability and
willingness to formulate and maintain
social contracts so there's honesty and
integrity associated with that so
the research literature indicates that
the best predictors of success are
ability to learn and conscientiousness
it's like well
come up with a better definition of
merit than that if you dare
because you can't now openness to
experience which is a creativity trait
predicts entrepreneurial ability and
creative creative ability and
extroversion predicts sales ability and
agreeableness predicts
say nursing and the capacity to take
care of people there are there are other
personality attributes that are relevant
but those are the main ones so
how is that not just dead set evidence
for the existence of
as functional a meritocracy as we've
been able to manage right i mean it's
distorted by
power claims it's distorted by deception
and bad hiring practices and nepotism
and
all the things but that's not central or
core to the system
i don't know any reasonably well
functioning organization in
in the west that's that where that isn't
the case
businesses as well bend over backwards
to be more than fair in their hiring
practices and
you know they want competent people and
you can define competence and you can
define
and measure merit of course and like i
think what's at the basis of all of this
radical critique is an assault on the
idea of merit itself
it's and i can understand that you know
because talents are
unfairly distributed and in the end it
will lower
the standards of the society
well that's the thing you know if you
look at this maybe you're cold-hearted
and you look at this purely from
and imagine you you even
manifested a critique from the left you
really think that corporations
aren't concerned enough about their own
survival to do everything they possibly
can to select the most competent people
obviously they're going to do that and
it's actually of benefit to everyone
else
because what's the alternative random
selection
if you're put in a position that you're
not qualified for you're going to fail
that is not very positive for you it's
no
mercy to put someone somewhere where
they're going to fail
absolutely that's not helpful we see all
these selection
processes now being subject to critique
universities are abandoning standardized
tests
they don't know the literature the
people who are doing this they're going
to replace them with selection
mechanisms that are far more
pathological i was talking with one of
my colleagues for example so
among the universities that abandoned
the gre the
graduate record exam for graduate
student entrance what happened
was that those students who came from
elite universities had a much
higher probability of being accepted
than they did when the gre was part of
the package
because the gre actually equalized
across universities
so you throw it out and what happens is
those who had the fortune to go to a
prestigious university have a much
bigger advantage
that's exactly what's going to happen
when we throw out valid measures of
of of competence i agree with you on
that and and we'll have a like a sort of
hyper inflation of grades like like with
some
currency we'll get to that maybe uh like
what happened in lebanon hyperinflation
here
we may get inflation uh at one point
i guess uh but for the grades as well uh
i i understand the reflex of some to say
oh it's the pandemic to head
but um help thinking that it would help
my point was during war
in lebanon and twice i had to do two
years and one so we'd have
seven chapters of math at once five of
physics and to catch up
like two years and one never ever they
did
what we are doing here you know like
removing the grades doing something
it remained sorrow 15 years of civil war
and uh so that was my experience
uh but um of course it's a decision
group decision although i'm not
talking but i'm saying that my what i
think about that i agree
so so now you're in limbo
like what faces you now what's what's in
the future for you
is it a tribunal like how are you going
to be tried for your crimes
the arbitration um so i saw the
arbitration process
and um whatever other
processes so so it's i can't answer that
because i
right now i don't know it's developing
fast you know it's
it's so it's uh so you don't even you
don't know the process by which this is
going to be remediated
oh i know of course the application like
right but so what does that mean
practically speaking
exactly what what what do you have to do
and what's going to happen to you
i we will see but i know that
whatever step that is being done that is
not
right uh there has been a grievance for
it that's all i can say
because that i can speak to but not the
details so
so okay so is your union is your union
supporting you
yes and i'm grateful okay well thank god
for that so they've decided they'll
support you on what grounds
um i cannot speak for the jesus that may
be harming the arbitration without
knowing but i can tell
something that really anyone reading
that blog and thinking like
how is that like it's it's it's there
are so many angles to it
uh but definitely like the blog
the freedom the academic freedom but
that i i can speak to because
that's what i i think so as well but
there are
other things that i would not be talking
about right now
and when does this arbitration process
begin and
i mean you're you're you're on the hook
at least till
january of 2022 december
the first uh yes december the first for
the suspension part
um and
also well that didn't go public uh
but also like how am i going to
you know like
suspension but also not being able to be
on campus
for example so so can you not be on
campus
no maybe that's what i would have
it's it's not secret but it's
i'm sharing so are you forbidden to go
on the campus
well it's part of the things that you're
suspended from being paid or not on
campus yes
okay what happens if you go on campus do
you know
well we had um municipal elections
lately and i joked
to myself saying what if had it been on
campus what do i do it's a legal problem
i guess or whatever problem
it is but so what are the grounds for
not allowing you to be on the campus
i guess i'm toxic maybe or maybe that
part of
it's because you presented danger they
enter
unsafety right right so that makes sense
so now you're an unsafe person and so
you can't go on the campus because
of the threat that you might pose to
students yes
how are your colleagues responding to
this
well again i can't speak for them but i
can speak in general i can say in these
situations when they happen
some people will come forward some
people will be afraid i understand that
people are afraid
i i totally understand because we're
different right we react differently
we may come forward to support me or do
something but some people
will not because they have family
family children yeah well not coming
forward is not going to protect them
if this can happen to you like the
lesson here there's only two lessons
here
either you're a bad person and you got
exactly what you deserved
or this can happen to anyone and so look
the hell out
i absolutely i agree and i i tend to
stand up for
people now i stand up for people from
real life but also
on the blog i write when something isn't
right like for example
um i'm talking about quickly of a
situation maybe dr matu bokuty
in in montreal whenever he has stories
like
being cancelled or trying to attempt or
or maybe doctor got side again from
montreal
i know you were friends i said bravo to
the
to the jewish public library library
yeah because they
they uh and and um even the prime
minister of quebec
i may have had a post saying bravo um
the university of laval as well you know
saying that academic
uh freedom um
must be protected academic i mean
it's protected um so that's
i mean i was a real commitment to it if
you see what i mean
well look at the academic
the bulk of the abstract intellectual
work in our society goes on at
universities so that's where the cutting
edge is it's not the only place there's
it happens in many places but it's one
of the main places it's certainly the
main place where
training for that is still instituted
apprenticeship for that is still
instituted
and so if that comes under assault if
that's in danger
then what's to protect the same thing in
the rest of the culture if
if it if it goes where it's paramount if
it if it's threatened where it's
paramount it's going to be threatened
everywhere
and that's why people should pay
attention to what's happening to you
and and and should put as much pressure
as they possibly can on the
administration at mount ellison to
reverse their insane decision
and to have some courage instead of cow
towing to a tiny minority of students
who don't even represent the communities
they purport to
represent you know my guess is if we
took those
and they'd be easy enough to find out
but no one will do it
if we surveyed these student
organizations
presented them with your story and
surveyed them i suspect that the vast
majority of students within those
organizations
organizations themselves would be
appalled at what's been done to you
so there's a handful of students who say
they represent a tiny proportion of
students but who actually don't
who complained bitterly in the
background and used deception
to bring administrative force to bear on
someone like you
and somehow that's okay and despite the
fact that thousands of people express
their support for you
the university won't change its mind and
for what to
to indicate their commitment to what to
this insane
um ideology that purports to be
anti-racist you can see how
fair it is in your case you know we're
we're matching an actual injustice
against a bunch of hypothetical
injustices
yes and my take on it was at the
beginning that okay
they chose whatever path i've never i i
but now i'm i am like
um the target because of all of all this
if you see what i mean like you're a
target not just a target you've also
been hit
you're not just a target exactly you've
been successfully hit
exactly like my career like when you are
a researcher
uh when you are a faculty member doing
your research or services across the
province and
the country your reputation even if you
want to go find
another job somewhere else your
reputation is
all what you have right your reputation
is done
look i the other thing is i'm on you're
on hiring committees i've said on hiring
committees so here's another rule about
hiring committees
and so given that there's a
preponderance of candidates
and that there's a preponderance of
qualified candidates any and all
candidates who show any sign whatsoever
of scandal are immediately removed from
the pack
because the the hiring committees won't
tolerate the risk
so as soon as you've been brushed with
scandal and then here's another question
for you because i've had to think this
through and i'm still not exactly sure
what to make of it
i could go back to the university of
toronto what about my graduate students
what bloody chance do they have on the
job market
it doesn't matter about their
publication rates so let's say they come
out with a stellar publication but
they're associated with me
it's like are they going to find a job
well the answer to that is
perhaps not and so what am i supposed to
do with that as a moral person am i
supposed to not go back to the
university because
merely being associated with me is
enough to
increase the probability that my
qualified students won't be acceptable
to any hiring committee
these shots are unbelievably effective
even if you can manage them
and it's not obvious that you can manage
them i mean you're still going through
this you have months to go
without gainful employment you know and
the doubts creep in when you're accused
of this sort of thing
because anybody with any sense pays
attention to accusations
right if you're psychopathic to the core
you don't care what other people think
but if you're a reasonable person you're
modifying your behavior all the time as
a consequence of the effect you have on
others
so you say well i'm reprehensible enough
so an institution that i admired
deeply yeah
and the whole canada right but i want to
say something you know some
people believe what they read and they
do not you know question or apply say
let's listen to the other side let's see
what happened
some even you know friends would call my
spouse and say
what well even if it has been said it's
too much
but my spouse will say she has not said
it
like so so they thought because it's
written in such a way that
is uh um yeah well you know what they
say where there's smoke there's fire
exactly but let's assume like some
people are saying
even if like the the met the how can i
say the punishment or the
discipline or is is beyond uh
is is surrealist disproportionate
disproportionate yes and severe which it
certainly
is yes
so what do you do now what are you doing
i mean
how have you been structuring your life
in the aftermath of this
i've never imagined that we can be
working as hard as
that without having uh you know being
suspended without pay like i'm
i'm i'm very busy you know working
doing what i need to do replying to
emails thanking people
strategizing doing things um working
basically on that so like all that time
i'm not putting it on my research i'm
not
uh putting it on future courses if i'm
still
here or on so it's i'm i'm living day by
day
uh but uh i am fine in the sense that
i know i know
who i am i know my values i know
the value of freedom a free
free expression for me academic freedom
slash they are related right um that i
know for sure
one of my friends once said the truth
doesn't matter anymore because it has
this
has been a narrative but luckily there
has been amazing journalists who have
had
more i'm not gonna be naming what
everyone knows help more
more than i can very imagine like i felt
that like you know those articles fell
on me from
heaven so the narratives has shifted
uh and if you see what i mean
yeah yeah well i was fortunate enough to
have some of canada's preeminent
journalists
you know take a second look what i was
doing and actually think it through and
you know come out in support of me thank
god for that
yes and and that was definitely a
lifesaver
um repeatedly over time
so so thank you know that absolutely
it's
thank god there are people who still
want to know what the actual story is
so well is there anything else that you
let's let's talk about your colleagues
again you said that
have any of your colleagues in the
department of mount ellison made a
public statement of
support for you um
public statement i'm not yeah public
statement
sorry to put you on the spot but you
know this is an important question
it's a very important question if the
people right next to you who know you
and who have worked with you
are so afraid that they can't say this
is not right
collectively which is what they should
have done they should have come together
as a group as a faculty and said
you go after her you go after all of us
but that isn't what's happening and so
this divide and conquer strategy works
just fine because you can single someone
out of the crowd and go after them and
no and everyone else shies away very
good question but i think
part of it they must be shocked right
now part of it is how you know actually
i'm not talking about the university of
my story universities these
investigations are are private they're
confident so
so like no one knows and and me without
things being confidential i tend to be
discreet i do not talk or bad talk about
people my colleagues know
know very well it's not my style i focus
on my task i do what what i need to do
my family
they know i don't i don't like blah blah
blah like you know
i tend to be more aggressive so directly
when i have to
if i have to like now you know that
fight uh but um
not when i don't i'm like how can i say
it so i don't do that
passive aggressive and talking and all
that yes i got
um kindness indirectly but without it
being said and throughout like the work
that we have we are doing
all that work and all this but they
didn't know what i was going through
probably or maybe they knew or i don't
know there's fear
definitely not at my institution there
is fear in the province
yeah well you know fear is fear is
justified as far as i'm concerned but
you
better bloody well be sure you're afraid
of the right thing
and you know it's one thing to be afraid
of making a public statement say in
support of you
and to be afraid of the consequences of
that although if every single one of
your
faculty colleagues did that the
university would buckle
instantly and apologize to you so
but if they okay so they're afraid of
doing that and they're afraid of spirit
each of them individually is afraid of
spearheading that but
why aren't they more afraid of ending up
where you ended up well
the the logic is well she she was in
cautious
she wrote her blog she said things that
a sensible person shouldn't say so that
means that now they're doomed
to only say those things that a sensible
person would say
under such conditions which is to say
absolutely nothing about anything
uh controversial ever again in their
entire careers
well why not be afraid of that instead
exactly and it comes down to
other situations where let's say someone
is a victim of
sexual harassment or something where we
can blame the victim or saying oh
the person was wearing something maybe
you know what i mean so maybe it's a way
of saying
she did it to herself because she's yeah
well that's the only other alternative
yes but definitely if it happened to be
it may and it could and it would happen
to anyone not just at my institution
um it's uh definitely and
no one should be going through that not
you not me not
anyone no one
anything else i want to say thank you
for that platform i
you know i think so highly of you um and
as i said some people would say why did
she talk to dr peterson maybe she should
talk to someone
i want to thank everyone who went public
uh that i'm reading to
to say something i want to thank people
that i didn't have the chance to already
send my
thanks they know i made a post about
that but thank you to everyone
yeah well you know the other thing about
who you choose to talk to in situations
like this is that
you choose to talk to people who will
talk to you exactly
and then you find out pretty damn
quickly who will talk to you and who
won't and so people might ask why you
would come and talk to me but part of
the answer to that is because i'll
actually talk to you
and so you know you you find out who
supports you and who doesn't and why
they do and why they don't
and so and then that any criticism of
that just becomes a further excuse to
maintain silence when silence shouldn't
be maintained like i'm appalled at your
colleagues
to speak frankly i'm absolutely appalled
at their silence on this issue
if they had an ounce of courage they
would unite together and they would tell
the administration to back the hell off
right now or else and the fact that they
won't do that
is it's it's appalling and if they think
that that's not going to come at a cost
then they've got their head buried in
the sand in a way that
requires a fair bit of intellectual
gymnastics to manage
a fair bit of avoidance of the topic
avoidance of thinking it through
it's like look what happened to rima oh
well she probably asked for it you know
she wasn't as cautious
yeah that's the conclusion you're going
to draw hey you think that's not going
to have an impact on your own behavior
if they if they banded together behind
you this would be over
right away the university would buckle
and the people who sanctioned you would
be fired
which is what exactly what should happen
there's no excuse for what happened to
you whatsoever
you know and i've counseled a lot of
people in my clinical practice
who've been accused of all sorts of
things and one of the things i've
learned is that it's very very
difficult for people to mount their own
defense
you know especially decent people
because they get accused of something
and then they
they don't attribute to themselves the
innocence that our legal system demands
right
innocent until proven guilty it's like
well you try to apply that to yourself
if you're accused you'll find it's not
so easy
you know and i would say in your case
well not only are you innocent but
this is an anti-truth campaign it's not
like well you sort of did some things
wrong and
maybe you should be more careful in the
future it's like no you had a blog
you said some things on it that you had
to say they weren't reprehensible things
you have every right to do that and
maybe you even have an obligation to
your creative spirit
and to your desire to communicate and to
formulate and
clarify your thoughts right in a pri in
a
in a in a public dom in a public forum
where you can get some feedback and
share your ideas with others which is
what you have to do if you're going to
think
and so you're not just innocent you know
you're targeted in a manner that
that speaks of the true motivation
behind the targeting which is to take
people like you
down and that's what's happened exactly
and your their your colleagues they
should hang their head in shame and
so should the university it's absolutely
appalling that one of canada's finest
undergraduate institutions should
have been participating in this bloody
awful
witch-hunt charade can i add something
uh
a final thing is i totally agree with
you but um
that's bambi or miyarima defended uh
people i don't agree with like
on some topics like for example someone
a great professor of law and i would
name because you can read it if you want
dr amir ataran he talks about quebec in
some words that i'm not very fond of but
i defended his right and i thanked
uh mr trudeau for having said you know
quebec bashing whatever so that story
but i i
may like other posts he does um and i
i read him if he's listening if he will
ever listen i do read his twitter i read
i read all i learned that from war
uh i used to read all the news on all
sides and not saying i read only this
because you'll be become you know like
it's a brainwashed type of thing if you
want during war when you're only reading
your side and you're not reading the
other media the other side so that was
one way of coping that i did is learning
to read ever and and
build you know my own thinking and this
is what i do now i
i read those whom i don't agree with
before reading those i agree with
i um i defended maybe uh politicians who
are not very
liked because they have been silenced on
social media i may have said
no one should be silenced no one um
not any politic no politician no scholar
no
no citizen no if you can only defend
those who you agree with who
are you going to defend exactly you
don't even agree with yourself
all the time you change your day from
mind to mind
you change your mind from day to day
that's what i know so
exactly so it's it's of course
unacceptable but i do uh
understand that people are afraid
sometimes because
they may have you know kids or it's a
pendulum yeah they should be afraid i
agree with you
rhema i agree with you but the issue is
what should you be afraid of
should you be afraid of defending your
colleague or should you be afraid of the
arbitrary power handed to
you know half with student mobs
hell-bent on bullying and destruction
who are presenting themselves in the
guise of moral avatars
like those are the people you should be
afraid of and cowardly administrators
who kowtow instantly to any complaint no
matter how
groundless because they don't want to
appear as sensitive as they might
those are the things to be afraid of so
fear actually isn't a defense
because the fear justifies a kind of
willful blindness
that is not going to help us in this
situation
now
well i hope that you find the continuing
courage to
be outraged on behalf of your innocence
and to go after and to not merely defend
yourself but to do it
in an aggressive manner and to bring the
people who've done this to you to
something approximating justice
and that might include the students too
because it isn't obvious to me that
they deserve to avoid sanction as a
consequence of their actions
everyone why in the world should they be
allowed to destroy someone's life
no everyone must we we all must be held
accountable for our actions
so those actions have consequences what
they did to me
is this is as we said so realistic let's
leave it there
but i totally agree with you and all all
options
should be considered in a in a battle
like that i would say
so if people want to write letters of
support for you
who should they go to the chairman of
your department the who
who should they be sent to i think maybe
everyone
maybe the higher administration maybe
the union copying the union copying
everyone a copy air
um i i got copies of letters a lot of
letters uh from
day one in february and right now uh
even uh you know someone a childhood
friend from lebanon on her own she
how many letters do you think have been
written to the university in support of
you
oh i am i i'm still into the thinking
and replying and
um a lot i'm still seeing my emails but
who knows
so is it hundreds
i can't put an accurate number but
um but a lot maybe maybe
maybe maybe because some things are
being done also
uh without it's being lettered right but
like trying to push with
uh other organizations or so so there
are things that i'm hearing about
people saying that they are doing them
or from other universities i'm hearing
there is a big movement and that
fundraising campaign
um and uh so i'm overwhelmed by the
support and again i want to thank
everyone uh i wanna you discover
probably it happened to you
discover people you know you you know
your friends of course but you discover
people that uh you would never imagine
they would have that
courage to do what they did um
it's it's an amazing experience let's
say
to say the least well we'll put the
relevant links for want to be
letter writers in the description of the
video so that they can do that yes and
you do discover
that's the thing you know you discover
the pervasiveness of
fear first of all and the fact that
so many people and perhaps the majority
of people
allow misplaced fear to silence them in
the short term
and pay and pay and pay and pay for that
in the medium to long term
and that's a terrible thing but you do
discover that there are people who have
so much courage you can hardly believe
it
well i wish you the best of luck dealing
with this thank you so much for having
me and please keep doing what you do
and i'm a fan i follow you
thank you well that's probably not in
your best interest but i do
appreciate it i don't care remember i'm
not politically correct so i'm i
i do read you and i do listen and i
appreciate
thank you thanks very much it was
painful but very good to talk to you
take good care
thank you
[Music]
you